\section*{3 INFERRING PRINCIPAL TYPES FOR MLSTRUCT}

We now informally describe our general approach to principal type inference in MLstruct.

\subsection*{3.1 Algebraic Subtyping}

MLstruct follows Dolan's algebraic subtyping [2017] discipline, which distinguishes itself from so-called semantic subtyping approaches in that it focuses on the algebraic properties of types, instead of focusing on set-theoretic semantics. In algebraic subtyping, some subtyping relationships are not necessary and cannot be justified if one were to look at types purely as denotations for sets of values. These algebraic relationships are nevertheless sound to have in the type system, and in turn enable principal type inference and type simplification.

As an example, consider $\left(\tau_{1} \rightarrow \tau_{2}\right) \wedge\left(\tau_{3} \rightarrow \tau_{4}\right) \leqslant\left(\tau_{1} \vee \tau_{3}\right) \rightarrow\left(\tau_{2} \wedge \tau_{4}\right)$, which holds in Dolan's MLsub. While the other direction holds by simple contravariance of function parameters and covariance of function results, this direction is a lot more contentious. It does not make sense from the set-theoretic point of view: a function that can be viewed as returning $\tau_{2}$ when given a $\tau_{1}$ and

\footnotetext{
${ }^{13}$ TypeScript does allow such definitions, meaning its type checker would necessarily be either unsound or incomplete.
}
returning $\tau_{4}$ when given a $\tau_{3}$ cannot be viewed as always returning a $\tau_{2} \wedge \tau_{4}$. For instance, consider $\lambda x . x$, typable both as Int $\rightarrow$ Int and as Bool $\rightarrow$ Bool, and which could therefore be assigned type $(\operatorname{lnt} \rightarrow \operatorname{lnt}) \wedge$ (Bool → Bool). Surely, this function never returns an Int $\wedge$ Bool value (an uninhabited type) when called with an Int $\vee$ Bool argument. But in MLsub, $\lambda x . x$ by design cannot be assigned such an intersection type; instead, its most general type is $\forall \alpha . \alpha \rightarrow \alpha$, which does subsume both Int → Int and Bool → Bool though not (Int → Int) $\wedge$ (Bool → Bool). This explains the restriction that intersections cannot be used to encode overloading in MLsub and MLstruct.

In MLstruct, we define further additional algebraic subtyping relationships, such as $\top \leqslant\{x$ : $\left.\tau_{1}\right\} \vee\left(\tau_{2} \rightarrow \tau_{3}\right)$, as hinted in Section 2.3.2. We similarly ensure that this relationship does not threaten soundness by making sure the language cannot meaningfully distinguish between values of these two types (i.e., one cannot pattern match on record or function types).

\subsection*{3.2 Basic Type Inference Idea}

We base the core of our type inference algorithm on a simple formulation of MLsub type inference we formulated in previous work [Parreaux 2020]. The constraint solver attaches a set of lower and upper bounds to each type variable, and maintain the transitive closure of these constraints, i.e., it makes sure that at all times the union of all lower bounds of a variable remains a subtype of the intersection of all its upper bounds. This means that when registering a new constraint of the form $\alpha \leqslant \tau$, we not only have to add $\tau$ to the upper bounds of $\alpha$, but also to constrain lowerBounds $(\alpha) \leqslant \tau$ in turn. One has to be particularly careful to maintain a "cache" of subtyping relationships currently being constrained, as the graphs formed by type variable bounds may contain cycles. Because types are regular, there is always a point, in a cyclic constraint, where we end up checking a constraint we are already in the process of checking (it is in the cache), in which case we can assume that the constraint holds and terminate. Constraints of the general form $\tau_{1} \leqslant \tau_{2}$ are handled by losslessly decomposing them into smaller constraints, until we arrive at constraints on type variables, which is made possible by the algebraic subtyping rules. The losslessness of this approach is needed to ensure that we only infer principal types. In other words, when decomposing a constraint, we must produce a set of smaller constraints that is equivalent to the original constraint. For example, we can decompose the constraint $\tau_{1} \vee\left(\tau_{2} \rightarrow \tau_{3}\right) \leqslant \tau_{4} \rightarrow \tau_{5}$ into the equivalent set of constraints: $\tau_{1} \leqslant \tau_{4} \rightarrow \tau_{5} ; \tau_{4} \leqslant \tau_{2} ;$ and $\tau_{3} \leqslant \tau_{5}$. If we arrive at a constraint between two incompatible type constructors, such as $\tau_{1} \rightarrow \tau_{2} \leqslant\left\{x: \tau_{3}\right\}$, an error is reported.

\subsection*{3.3 Solving Constraints with Unions and Intersections}

By contrast with MLsub, MLstruct supports union and intersections types in a first-class capacity, meaning that one can use these types in both positive and negative positions. ${ }^{14}$ This is particularly important to type check instance matching, which requires unions in negative positions, and class types, which require intersections in positive positions (both illegal in MLsub).

The main problem that arises in this setting is: How to resolve constraints with the shapes $\tau_{1} \leqslant \tau_{2} \vee \tau_{3}$ and $\tau_{1} \wedge \tau_{2} \leqslant \tau_{3}$ ? Such constraints cannot be easily decomposed into simpler constraints without losing information - which would prevent us from achieving complete type inference - and without having to perform backtracking - which would quickly become intractable, even in non-pathological cases, and would yield a set of possible types instead of a single principal

\footnotetext{
${ }^{14}$ Positive positions correspond to the types that a term outputs, while negative positions correspond to the types that a term takes in as input. For instance, in $\left(\tau_{0} \rightarrow \tau_{1}\right) \rightarrow \tau_{2}$, type $\tau_{2}$ is in positive position since it is the output of the main function, and the function type ( $\tau_{0} \rightarrow \tau_{1}$ ) is in negative position, as it is taken as an input to the main function. On the other hand, $\tau_{1}$, which is returned by the function taken as input is in negative position (since it is provided by callers via the argument function), and $\tau_{0}$ is in positive position (since it is provided by the main function when calling the argument function).
}
type. When faced with such constraints, we distinguish two cases: (1) there is a type variable among $\tau_{1}, \tau_{2}$, and $\tau_{3}$; and (2) conversely, none of these types are type variables.
3.3.1 Negation Types. We use negation types to reformulate constraints involving type variables into forms that allow us to make progress, relying on the Boolean-algebraic properties of negation. A constraint such as $\tau_{1} \leqslant \tau_{2} \vee \alpha$ can be rewritten to $\tau_{1} \wedge \neg \tau_{2} \leqslant \alpha$ by turning the "positive" $\tau_{2}$ on the right into a "negative" on the left, as these are equivalent in a Boolean algebra. ${ }^{15}$ Therefore, it is sufficient and necessary to constrain $\alpha$ to be a supertype of $\tau_{1} \wedge \neg \tau_{2}$ to solve the constraint at hand. Similarly, we can solve $\alpha \wedge \tau_{1} \leqslant \tau_{2}$ by constraining $\alpha$ to be a subtype of $\tau_{2} \vee \neg \tau_{1}$. ${ }^{16}$ When both transformations are possible, one may pick one or the other equivalently. The correctness of these transformations is formally demonstrated in Theorem B.20.. This approach provides a solution to case (1), but in a way it only pushes the problem around, delaying the inevitable apparition of case (2).
3.3.2 Normalization of Constraints. To solve problem (2), we normalize constraints until they are in the shape " $\tau_{\text {con }} \leqslant \tau_{\text {dis }}$ ", where (using a horizontal overline to denote 0 to $n$ repetitions):
- $\tau_{\text {con }}$ represents $\mathrm{T}, \perp$, or the intersection of any non-empty subset of $\left\{\# C, \tau_{1} \rightarrow \tau_{2},\{\overline{x: \tau}\}\right\}$.
- $\tau_{\text {dis }}$ represents types of the form $\mathrm{T}, \perp,\left(\tau_{1} \rightarrow \tau_{2}\right) \overline{\vee \# C},\{x: \tau\} \overline{\vee \# C}$, or \#C $\overline{\vee \# C^{\prime}}$.

Let us consider a few examples. First, given a constraint like $\left(\tau_{1} \vee \tau_{2}\right) \wedge \tau_{3} \leqslant \tau_{4}$, we can distribute the intersection over the union thanks to the rules of Boolean algebras (see Section 4.4.4), which results in $\left(\tau_{1} \wedge \tau_{3}\right) \vee\left(\tau_{2} \wedge \tau_{3}\right) \leqslant \tau_{4}$, allowing us to solve $\tau_{1} \wedge \tau_{3} \leqslant \tau_{4}$ and $\tau_{2} \wedge \tau_{3} \leqslant \tau_{4}$ independently. Second, given a constraint like $\tau_{1} \leqslant\left\{x: \tau_{2}\right\} \vee \tau_{3} \rightarrow \tau_{4}$, we simply use the fact that $\left\{x: \tau_{2}\right\} \vee \tau_{3} \rightarrow \tau_{4} \equiv \top$ (as explained in Section 2.2.2) to reduce the constraint to $\tau_{1} \leqslant \top$, a tautology. Third, with constraints containing intersected nominal class tags on the left, we can compute their greatest lower bound based on our knowledge of the single-inheritance class hierarchy. We eventually end up with constraints of the shape " $\tau_{\text {con }} \leqslant \tau_{\text {dis }}$ " and there always exists a $\tau_{i} \in \tau_{\text {con }}$ and $\tau_{j}^{\prime} \in \tau_{\text {dis }}$ such that we can reduce the constraint to an equivalent constraint $\tau_{i} \leqslant \tau_{j}^{\prime}$. Notice that if two related nominal tags appears on each side, it is always safe to pick that comparison, as doing so does not entail any additional constraints. If there are no such related nominal tags, the only other choice is to find a type in the right-hand side to match a corresponding type in the left-hand side, and the syntax of these normal forms prevents there being more than one possible choice. All in all, our Boolean algebra of types equipped with various algebraic simplification laws ensures that we have a lossless way of resolving the complex constraints that arise from union and intersection types, enabling principal type inference.

The constraint solving algorithm described in Section 5.3 and implemented in the artifact uses the ideas explored above but puts the entire constraint into a normal form, instead of normalizing constraints on the fly. This helps to efficiently guarantee termination by maintaining a cache of currently-processed subtyping relationships in normal forms, which is straightforward to query.

\subsection*{3.4 Subsumption Checking}

Subsumption checking, denoted by $\leqslant^{\forall}$, is important to check that definitions conform to given signatures. Contrary to MLsub, which syntactically separates positive from negative types (the polarity

\footnotetext{
${ }^{15}$ Aiken and Wimmers [1993] used a similar trick, albeit in a more specific set-theoretic interpretation of unions/intersections.
${ }^{16}$ If it were not for pattern matching, we could avoid negation types by adopting a more complicated representation of type variable bounds that internalizes the same information. That is, instead of $\alpha \leqslant \tau$ and $\alpha \geqslant \tau$ for a given type variable $\alpha$, we would have bounds of the form $\alpha \wedge \pi \leqslant \tau$ and $\alpha \vee \pi \geqslant \tau$, representing $\alpha \leqslant \tau \vee \neg \pi$ and $\alpha \geqslant \tau \wedge \neg \pi$ respectively. But reducing several upper/lower bounds into a single bound, which previously worked by simply intersecting/taking the union of them, would now be impossible without generalizing bounds further. Type simplification would also become difficult.
}
restriction), and therefore requires different algorithms for constraint solving and subsumption checking, in MLstruct we can immediately reuse the constraint solving algorithm for subsumption checking, without requiring much changes to the type system. To implement $\forall \Xi_{1} \cdot \tau_{1} \leqslant \forall \forall \Xi_{2} \cdot \tau_{2}$, we instantiate all the type variables in $\Xi_{1}$, with their bounds, to fresh type variables, and we turn all the variables in $\Xi_{2}$ into rigid variables (so-called "skolems"). The latter can be done by turning these type variables into fresh flexible nominal tags and by inlining their bounds, expressing them in terms of unions, intersections, and recursive types. Since there is no polarity restrictions in our system, the resulting types can be compared directly using the normal constraint solving algorithm.

Flexible nominal tags $\# F$ are just like nominal class tags $\# C$, except that they can coexist with unrelated tags without reducing to $\perp$. For example, while $\# C_{1} \wedge \# C_{2}$ is equivalent to ⟂ in MLstruct when $C_{1}$ and $C_{2}$ are unrelated, $\# F \wedge \# C_{2}$ is not. ${ }^{17}$ Flexible nominal tags are also the feature used to encode the nominal tags of traits, necessary to implement mixin traits as described in Section 2.1.2.

For lack of space, we do not formally describe subsumption checking in this paper.

\subsection*{3.5 Simplification and Presentation of Inferred Types}

Type simplification and pretty-printing are important components of any practical implementation of MLsub and MLstruct. They indeed perform a lot of the heavy-lifting of type inference, massaging inferred types, which are often big and unwieldy, into neat and concise equivalent type expressions. In this section, we briefly explain how simplification is performed in MLstruct.
3.5.1 Basic Simplifications. For basic simplifications, we essentially follow Parreaux [2020] - we remove polar occurrences of type variables, remove type variables "sandwiched" between identical bounds, and we perform some hash consing to simplify inferred recursive types. The simplification of unions, intersections, and negations is not fully addressed by Parreaux, since MLsub does not fully supports these features. In MLstruct, we apply standard Boolean algebra simplification techniques to simplify these types, such as putting them into disjunctive normal forms, simplifying complements, and factorizing common conjuncts. We also reduce types as they arise, based on Section 2.2.2.
3.5.2 Bound Inlining. Many types can be represented equivalently using either bounded quantification or inlined intersection and union types, so we often have to choose between them. For instance, $\forall(\alpha \leqslant \operatorname{lnt}) \cdot(\beta \geqslant \operatorname{lnt}) . \alpha \rightarrow \alpha \rightarrow \beta$ is much better expressed as the equivalent $\operatorname{lnt} \rightarrow \ln \rightarrow \operatorname{lnt}$. But whether $(\alpha \wedge \mathrm{Int}) \rightarrow(\alpha \wedge \mathrm{Int}) \rightarrow \alpha$ is better than the equivalent $\forall(\alpha \leqslant \mathrm{Int}) . \alpha \rightarrow \alpha \rightarrow \alpha$ may depend on personal preferences. As a general rule of thumb, we only inline bounds when doing so would not duplicate them and when they are not cyclic (i.e., we do not inline recursive bounds).

\subsection*{3.6 Implementation}

MLstruct is implemented in $\sim 5000$ lines of Scala code, including advanced type simplification algorithms and error reporting infrastructure. ${ }^{18}$ We have an extensive tests suite consisting of more than 4000 lines of well-typed and ill-typed MLstruct expressions, for which we automatically check the output of the type simplifier and error reporting for regressions. Running this test suite in parallel takes $\sim$ 2s on a 2020 iMac with a 3.8 GHz 8-Core Intel Core i7 and 32 GB 2667 MHz DDR4.

