\section*{2 PRESENTATION OF MLSTRUCT}

MLstruct subsumes Dolan's MLsub, the previous state of the art in type inference with subtyping, which itself subsumes traditional ML typing: all ML terms are typeable in MLsub and all MLsub terms are typeable in MLstruct. On top of this fertile ML substrate pollinated with MLsub's rich subtyping theory of records and equirecursive types, MLstruct grows structurally-typed abstractions

\footnotetext{
${ }^{4}$ Wrapping the result in Some would not work either (as Some Int doesn't unify with Some \{value: Int, payload: Int\}).
${ }^{5}$ The GitHub repository of the full MLscript language is available at https://github.com/hkust-taco/mlscript.
}
in the form of unions, intersections, negations, structural class types, and class-instance matching. We now present these features along with some examples.

\subsection*{2.1 Overview of MLscript Features}

An MLstruct program is made of top-level statements followed by an expression, the program's body. A statements can be either a type declaration (class or type alias) or a top-level function definition, written def $f=t$ or rec $\operatorname{def} f=t$ when $f$ is recursive. MLstruct infers polymorphic types for def bindings, allowing them to be used at different type instantiations in the program.
2.1.1 Polymorphism. Polymorphic types include a set of type variables with bounds, such as $\forall(\alpha \leqslant \operatorname{lnt})$. $\operatorname{List}[\alpha] \rightarrow \operatorname{List}[\alpha]$. The bounds of polymorphic types are allowed to be cyclic, which can be interpreted as indirectly describing recursive types. For example, $\forall(\alpha \leqslant \top \rightarrow \alpha)$. $\alpha$ is the principal type scheme of rec def $\mathrm{f}=\mathrm{fun} \mathrm{a} \rightarrow \mathrm{f}$ which accepts any argument and returns itself. To simplify the presentation of inferred polymorphic types with recursive bounds, such as $\forall(\alpha \leqslant \alpha \rightarrow \beta), \beta . \alpha \rightarrow \beta$, we may use an equivalent 'as' shorthand, as follows: $\forall \beta .((\alpha \rightarrow \beta)$ as $\alpha) \rightarrow \beta$.

MLstruct applies aggressive simplification on inferred types, removing redundant type variables and inlining simple type variable bounds (see Section 3.5), so that they are usually fairly concise.
2.1.2 Classes, Inheritance, and Type Aliases. Because object orientation is not the topic of this paper, which focuses on functional-style use cases, the basic OO constructs of MLstruct presented here are intentionally bare-bone. Classes are declared with the following syntax:
class $C[A, B, \ldots]: D[S, T, \ldots] \wedge\{x: X, y: Y, \ldots\}$
where $A$, $B$, etc. are type parameters, $S, T, X, Y$, etc. are arbitrary types and $D$ is the parent class of $C$, which can be left out if the class has no parents. Along with a type constructor $\mathrm{C}[A, B, \ldots]$, such a declaration also introduces a data constructor C of type:
$$
\mathrm{C}: \forall \beta_{1}, \beta_{2}, \ldots,\left(\alpha_{1} \leqslant \tau_{1}\right),\left(\alpha_{2} \leqslant \tau_{2}\right), \ldots .\left\{x_{1}: \alpha_{1}, x_{2}: \alpha_{2}, \ldots\right\} \rightarrow \mathrm{C}\left[\beta_{1}, \beta_{2} \ldots\right] \wedge\left\{x_{1}: \alpha_{1}, x_{2}: \alpha_{2}, \ldots\right\}
$$
where $x_{i}$ are all the fields declared by $\mathrm{C}\left[\beta_{1}, \beta_{2}, \ldots\right]$ or by any of its ancestors in the inheritance hierarchy, and $\tau_{i}$ are the corresponding types - if a field is declared in several classes of the hierarchy, we take the intersection of all the declared types for that field. To retain as precise typing as possible, we let the types of the fields taken in parameters to be arbitrary subtypes $\alpha_{i}$ of the declared $\tau_{i}$, so we can refine the result type $\mathrm{C}\left[\beta_{1}, \beta_{2} \ldots\right] \wedge\left\{x_{1}: \alpha_{1}, x_{2}: \alpha_{2}, \ldots\right\}$ to retain these precise types. For instance, assuming class C : $\{\mathrm{x}$ : Int $\}$, term $\mathrm{C}\{\mathrm{x}=1\}$ is given the precise type $\mathrm{C} \wedge\{x: 1\}$.

Classes are restricted to single-inheritance hierarchies. Like in the work of Muehlboeck and Tate [2018], this has the nice property that it allows union types to be refined by reducing types like $\left(C_{0} \vee \tau\right) \wedge C_{1}$ to $C_{0} \wedge C_{1} \vee \tau \wedge C_{1}$ by distributivity and to just $\tau \wedge C_{1}$ when $C_{0}$ and $C_{1}$ are unrelated $\left(C_{0} \wedge C_{1} \equiv \perp\right)$. But MLstruct can easily be extended to support traits, which are not subject to this restriction, by slightly adapting the definition of type normal forms (our artifact [Parreaux et al. 2022] implements this). Thanks to their use of negation types (described in Section 4.3), the typing rules for pattern matching do not even have to change, and traits can also be pattern-matched. In fact, the full MLscript language supports mixin trait composition [Schärli et al. 2003] similar to Scala [Odersky et al. 2004], whereby traits can be inherited alongside classes, and method overriding is resolved in so-called "linearization order."
2.1.3 Shadowing. Non-recursive defs use shadowing semantics, ${ }^{6}$ so they can simulate the more traditional field initialization and overriding semantics of traditional class constructors. For instance:
class Person: \{name: Str, age: Nat, isMajor: Bool\}
def Person n a = Person\{name = capitalize n, age = a, isMajor = a >= 18\}

\footnotetext{
${ }^{6}$ Type names, on the other hand, live in a different namespace and are not subject to shadowing.
}
in which the def, of inferred type Person ${ }_{1}: \forall(\alpha \leqslant \mathrm{Nat})$. Str $\rightarrow \alpha \rightarrow$ Person $\wedge\{$ age : $\alpha\}$, shadows the bare constructor of the Person class (of type Person ${ }_{0}: \forall(\alpha \leqslant \operatorname{Str}),(\beta \leqslant \mathrm{Nat}),(\gamma \leqslant$ Bool). $\{$ name : $\alpha$, age : $\beta$, isMajor : $\gamma\} \rightarrow$ Person $\wedge\{$ name : $\alpha$, age : $\beta$, is Major : $\gamma\}$ ), forcing users of the class to go through it as the official Person constructor. Function capitalize returns a Str, so no ‘name’ refinement is needed(Person $\wedge\{$ age : $\alpha$, name : Str $\} \equiv \operatorname{Person} \wedge\{$ age : $\alpha\}$ ).
2.1.4 Nominality. Classes are not equivalent to their bodies. Indeed, they include a notion of "nominal identity", which means that while a class type is a subtype of its body, it is not a supertype of it. So unlike TypeScript, it is not possible to use a record $\{x=1\}$ as an instance of a class declared as class $C$ : $\{x$ : Int $\}$. To obtain a $C$, one must use its constructor, as in $C\{x=1\}$. This nominality property is a central part of our type system and is much demanded by users in practice. ${ }^{7}$ It comes at no loss of generality, as type synonyms can be used if nominality is not wanted.
2.1.5 Type Aliases. Arbitrary types can be given names using the syntax type $\mathrm{X}[\mathrm{A}, \mathrm{B}, \ldots]=\mathrm{T}$. Type aliases and classes can refer to each other freely and can be mutually recursive.
2.1.6 Guardedness Check. Classes and type aliases are checked to ensure they do not inherit or refer to themselves immediately without going through a "concrete" type constructor first (i.e., a function or record type). For instance, the recursive occurrence of A in type $\mathrm{A}[\mathrm{X}]=\mathrm{Id}[\mathrm{A}[\mathrm{X}]] \vee \operatorname{Int}$ where type $\mathrm{Id}[\mathrm{Y}]=\mathrm{Y}$ is unguarded and thus illegal, but type $\mathrm{A}[\mathrm{X}]=\{\mathrm{x}: \mathrm{A}[\mathrm{X}]\} \vee$ Int is fine.
2.1.7 Class-Instance Matching. As presented in the introduction, one can match values against class patterns in a form of primitive pattern matching. Consider the following definitions:
```
    class Cons[A]: Some[A] $\wedge$ \{ tail: List[A] \} type List[A] = Cons[A] $\vee$ None
    rec def mapList f ls = case ls of
        Cons → Cons\{value = f ls.value, tail = mapList f ls.tail\},
        None → None\{\}
of inferred type: ${ }^{8} \quad$ mapList : $\forall \alpha, \beta .(\alpha \rightarrow \beta) \rightarrow(\operatorname{Cons}[\alpha] \wedge\{$ tail : $\gamma\} \vee$ None $)$ as $\gamma \rightarrow$
            $(\operatorname{Cons}[\beta] \wedge\{$ tail : $\delta\} \vee$ None $)$ as $\delta$
```


We define a List type using None as the "nil" list and whose cons constructor extends Some (from the introduction). A list in this encoding can be passed to any function that expects an option in input - if the list is a Cons instance, it is also a Some instance, and the value field representing the head of the list will be used as the value wrapped by the option. This example demonstrates that structural typing lets us mix and match as well as refine different constructors in a flexible way.

As a slightly bigger motivating example, the List type thus defined can then be used as follows, defining the classical unzip combinator:
```
def Cons head tail = Cons \{ value = head, tail = tail \} def None = None\{\}
rec def unzip xs = case xs of
    None → \{ fst = None, snd = None \},
    Some → let tmp = unzip xs.tail in \{ fst = Cons xs.value.fst tmp.fst ,
        snd = Cons xs.value.snd tmp.snd \}
```


Below are two possible types that may be annotated explicitly by the user for these definitions, and which will be automatically checked by MLstruct for conformance (a.k.a., subsumption, see Section 3.4) against their inferred types. ${ }^{9}$

\footnotetext{
${ }^{7}$ The lack of nominal typing for classes has been a major pain point in TypeScript. The issue requesting it, created in 2014 and still not resolved, has accumulated more than 500 "thumbs up". See: https://github.com/Microsoft/Typescript/issues/202. ${ }^{8}$ The where keyword is used to visually separate the specification of type variable bounds, making them more readable. ${ }^{9}$ Annotating the types of public functions, while not required by MLstruct, is seen as good practice in some communities. Moreover, the subsumption mechanism can be used to provide and check module signatures in an ML-style module system.
}
```
def Cons: $\alpha \rightarrow(\beta \wedge \operatorname{List}[\alpha]) \rightarrow(\operatorname{Cons}[\alpha] \wedge\{$ value: $\alpha$, tail: $\beta\})$
def unzip: List[\{ fst: $\alpha$, snd: $\beta$ \}] → \{ fst: List[ $\alpha$ ], snd: List[ $\beta$ ] \}
```


\subsection*{2.2 Constructing the Lattice of Types}

The algebraic subtyping philosophy of type system design is to begin with the subtyping of data types (records, functions, etc.) and to define the order connectives to fit this subtyping order, rather than to follow set-theoretic intuitions. We follow this philosophy and aim to design our subtyping order to tackle the following design constraints:
(A) The order connectives $\wedge, \vee$, and $\neg$ should induce a Boolean algebra, so that we can manipulate types using well-known and intuitive Boolean-algebraic reasoning techniques.
(B) Nominal tags and their negations specifically should admit an intuitive set-theoretic understanding, in the sense that for any class $C$, type $\# C$ should denote all instances of $C$ while type $\neg \# C$ should correspondingly denote all instances that are not derived from class $C .^{10}$
(C) The resulting system should admit principal types as well as an effective polymorphic type inference strategy, where "effective" means that it should not rely on backtracking.
2.2.1 Lattice Types. Top, written T, is the type of all values, a supertype of every other type. Its dual bottom, written ⟂ , is the type of no values, a subtype of every other type. For every $\tau$, we have $\perp \leqslant \tau \leqslant \top$. Intersection $\wedge$ and union $\vee$ types are the respective meet and join operators in the subtyping lattice. It is worth discussing possible treatments one can give these connectives:
(1) We can axiomatize them as denoting the intersection $\cap$ and union $\cup$ of the sets of values that their operands denote, which is the approach taken by semantic subtyping.
(2) We can axiomatize them as greatest lower bound (GLB) and least upper bound (LUB) operators, usually written $\sqcap$ and $\sqcup$, whose meaning is given by following the structure of a preexisting lattice of simple types (types without order connectives). In this interpretation, we can calculate the results of these operators when their operands are concretely known.
(3) Finally, we can view $\wedge$ and $\vee$ as type constructors in their own right, with dedicated subtyping derivation rules. Then unions and intersections are not "computed away" but instead represent proper constructed types, which may or may not be equivalent to existing simple types.
2.2.2 Subtyping. We base our approach primarily on (3) but we do include a number of subtyping rules whose goal is to make the order connectives behave like (2) in some specific cases:
- We posit $\# C_{1} \wedge \# C_{2} \leqslant \perp$ whenever classes $C_{1}$ and $C_{2}$ are unrelated. ${ }^{11}$ This makes sense because there are no values that can be instances of both classes at the same time, due to single inheritance. We obviously also have $\# C_{1} \wedge \# C_{2} \geqslant \perp$, meaning the two sides are equivalent (they subtype each other), which we write $\# C_{1} \wedge \# C_{2} \equiv \perp$. On the other hand, $\# C \leqslant \# D$ for all $C, D$ where $C$ inherits from $D$; so when $\# C_{1}$ and $\# C_{2}$ are related then either $\# C_{1} \wedge \# C_{2} \equiv \# C_{1}$ or $\# C_{1} \wedge \# C_{2} \equiv \# C_{2}$. Overall, we can always "reduce" intersections of nominal class tags to a single non-intersection type, making $\wedge$ behave like a GLB operator in the class inheritance sublattice, made of nominal tags, $\triangleleft, \perp$, and $\vee$, evocative of (2).
- We also posit the nonstandard rule $\left(\tau_{1} \rightarrow \tau_{2}\right) \wedge\left(\tau_{3} \rightarrow \tau_{4}\right) \leqslant\left(\tau_{1} \vee \tau_{3}\right) \rightarrow\left(\tau_{2} \wedge \tau_{4}\right)$. The other direction holds by function parameter contravariance and result covariance, so again the two sides are made equivalent. $\wedge$ behaves like a GLB operator on function types in a lattice which does not contain subtyping-based overloaded functions types, such as those of Dolan [2017]; Pottier [1998b]. This rule is illogical from the set-theoretic point of view: a function that can be viewed as returning a $\tau_{2}$ when given a $\tau_{1}$ and returning a $\tau_{4}$ when given a $\tau_{3}$ cannot be

\footnotetext{
${ }^{10}$ By contrast, we have no specific requirements on the meaning of negated function and record types, which are uninhabited.
${ }^{11}$ This class intersection annihilation rule is not novel; for example, Ceylon has a similar one [Muehlboeck and Tate 2018].
}
viewed as always returning a $\tau_{2} \wedge \tau_{4}$. For instance, consider $\lambda x . x$, typeable both as $\operatorname{Int} \rightarrow \operatorname{Int}$ and as Bool ⟶ Bool. According to both classical intersection type systems and the semantic subtyping interpretation, this term could be assigned type ( $\operatorname{Int} \rightarrow \operatorname{Int}) \wedge($ Bool $\rightarrow$ Bool). But we posited that this type is equivalent to $(\operatorname{Int} \vee \operatorname{Bool}) \rightarrow(\operatorname{Int} \wedge \operatorname{Bool})$. Thankfully, in MLstruct $\lambda x . x$ cannot be assigned such an intersection type; instead, its most general type is $\forall \alpha . \alpha \rightarrow \alpha$, which does subsume both Int → Int and Bool → Bool, but not $($ Int → Int $) \wedge($ Bool → Bool $)$. This explains why intersection types cannot be used to encode overloading in MLstruct. ${ }^{12}$
- For record intersections, we have the standard rule that $\{x: \tau\} \wedge\{x: \pi\} \leqslant\{x: \tau \wedge \pi\}$, making the two sides equivalent since the other direction holds by depth subtyping. Intersections of distinct record fields, on the other hand, do not reduce and stay as they are - in fact, multi-field record types are encoded, in MLstruct, as intersections of individual single-field record types, following Reynolds [1997]. For instance, assuming $x \neq y$, then $\left\{x: \tau_{1}, y: \tau_{2}\right\}$ is not a core form but merely syntax sugar for $\left\{x: \tau_{1}\right\} \wedge\left\{y: \tau_{2}\right\}$.
- We apply similar treatments to various forms of unions: First, $\left(\tau_{1} \rightarrow \tau_{2}\right) \vee\left(\tau_{3} \rightarrow \tau_{4}\right) \equiv \left(\tau_{1} \wedge \tau_{3}\right) \rightarrow\left(\tau_{2} \vee \tau_{4}\right)$, the dual of the function intersection treatment mentioned above. Second, we recognize that $\{x: \tau\} \vee\{y: \pi\}$ and $\{x: \tau\} \vee\left(\pi_{1} \rightarrow \pi_{2}\right)$, where $x \neq y$, cannot be meaningfully used in a program, as the language has no feature allowing to tease these two components apart, so we identify these types with T , the top type. This is done by adding $\top \leqslant\{x: \tau\} \vee\{y: \pi\}$ and $\top \leqslant\{x: \tau\} \vee\left(\pi_{1} \rightarrow \pi_{2}\right)$ as subtyping derivation rules.
The full specification of our subtyping theory is presented later, in Section 4 (Figure 4).
2.2.3 Soundness. The soundness of subtyping disciplines was traditionally studied by finding semantic models corresponding to types and subtyping, where types are typically understood as predicates on the denotations of $\lambda$ terms (obtained from some $\lambda$ model) and where subtyping is understood as inclusion between the corresponding sets of denotations. In this paper, we take a much more straightforward approach: all we require from the subtyping relation is that it be consistent, in the sense that it correctly relate types constructed from the same constructors and that it not relate unrelated type constructors. For instance, $\tau_{1} \rightarrow \tau_{2} \leqslant \pi_{1} \rightarrow \pi_{2}$ should hold if and only if $\pi_{1} \leqslant \tau_{1}$ and $\tau_{2} \leqslant \pi_{2}$, and $\{x: \operatorname{lnt}\} \leqslant \# C$ should not be derivable. This turns out to be a sufficient condition for the usual soundness properties of progress and preservation to hold in our language. Consistency is more subtle than it may first appear. We cannot identify, e.g., $\# C \vee\{x: \tau\}$ with $T$ even though the components of this type cannot be teased apart through instance matching, as doing so is incompatible with distributivity. Notice the conjunctive normal form of $\pi=\# C \wedge\{x: \tau\} \vee \# D \wedge\left\{y: \tau^{\prime}\right\}$ is $\pi \equiv(\# C \vee \# D) \wedge\left(\# C \vee\left\{y: \tau^{\prime}\right\}\right) \wedge(\{x: \tau\} \vee \# D) \wedge(\{x: \tau\} \vee\left\{y: \tau^{\prime}\right\}$ ). We can make $\{x: \tau\} \vee\left\{y: \tau^{\prime}\right\}$ equivalent to T when $x \neq y$ because that still leaves $\pi \equiv(\# C \vee \# D) \wedge\left(\# C \vee\left\{y: \tau^{\prime}\right\}\right) \wedge(\{x: \tau\} \vee \# D)$, which is equivalent to the original $\pi$ by distributivity and simplification. But making $\# C \vee\left\{y: \tau^{\prime}\right\}$ and $\{x: \tau\} \vee \# D$ equivalent to T would make $\pi \equiv \# C \vee \# D$, losing all information related to the fields, and breaking pattern matching!
2.2.4 Records. Record values are built using the syntax $\{x 1=t 1, x 2=t 2, \ldots\}$ and are assigned the corresponding types $\left\{x_{1}: \tau_{1}, x_{2}: \tau_{2}, \ldots\right\}$. Record types are related via the usual width and depth subtyping relationships. Width subtyping means that, for instance, $\left\{x: \tau_{1}, y: \tau_{2}\right\} \leqslant\left\{x: \tau_{1}\right\}$, and depth subtyping means that, for instance, $\left\{x: \tau_{1}, y: \tau_{2}\right\} \leqslant\left\{x: \tau_{1}, y: \tau_{3}\right\}$ if $\tau_{2} \leqslant \tau_{3}$.
2.2.5 Negation Types. Finally, we can add Boolean-algebraic negation to our subtyping lattice. However, its interpretation is considerably constrained by the Boolean structure and by the rules already presented in Section 2.2.2. In some languages, the values of a negation type $\neg \tau$ are intuitively

\footnotetext{
${ }^{12}$ Other forms of overloading, such as type classes and constructor overloading (see Section 6), are still possible.
}
understood as all values that are not of the negated type $\tau$, but in MLstruct, this intuition only holds for nominal tags. For other constructs, such as functions and records, negations assume a purely algebraic role. For instance, we have relationships like $\neg\{x: \tau\} \leqslant \pi_{1} \rightarrow \pi_{2}$ due to $\{x: \tau\} \vee \pi_{1} \rightarrow \pi_{2}$ being identified with $T$ (see also Section 4.4.5). Because no values inhabit types like $\neg\{x: \tau\}$ and $\neg\left(\pi_{1} \rightarrow \pi_{2}\right)$, these types should be essentially thought of as special bottom types that, for algebraic reasons, technically have to contain more static information than ⟂ and have to possess fewer subtyping relationships.

Negations can express interesting patterns, such as safe division, as seen below, where 'e: T' is used to ascribe a type T to an expression e:
```
def div $n m=n /(m: \operatorname{Int} \wedge \neg 0) \quad$ def $f \times=\operatorname{div} \times 2$
div: Int → (Int $\wedge \neg 0) \rightarrow$ Int f: Int → Int
def $g(x:$ Int $)=\operatorname{div} 100 x \quad$ error: found Int, expected Int $\wedge \neg 0$
def div_opt $n m=$ case $m$ of $0 \rightarrow$ None\{\}, _ → Some\{value = div n $m$ \}
div_opt: Int → Int → (None v Some[Int])
```


Here, 'case $m$ of ...' is actually a shorthand for the core form 'case $m=m$ of ...' which shadows the outer $m$ with a local variable $m$ that is assigned a more refined type in each case branch.

As we saw in the introduction, ✓ also allows for the sound typing of class-instance matching with default cases. Moreover, together with $\mathrm{T}, \perp, \wedge$, and $\vee$, our type structure forms a Boolean lattice, whose algebraic properties are essential to enabling principal type inference (see Section 3.3.1).
2.2.6 Structural Decomposition. We reduce complex object types to simpler elementary parts, which can be handled in a uniform way. Similarly to type aliases, which can always be replaced by their bodies, we can replace class types by their fields intersected with the corresponding nominal tags. For example, Cons $[\tau]$ as defined in Section 2.1.7 reduces to \#Cons $\wedge\{$ value : $\tau$, tail : $\operatorname{List}[\tau]\}$. Recall that class tags like \#Cons represent the nominal identities of classes. They are related with other class tags by a subtyping relationship that follows the inheritance hierarchy. For instance, given class $C[\alpha]: D[\alpha \vee 2] \wedge\{x: 0 \vee \alpha\}$ and class $D[\beta]:\{x: \beta, y: \operatorname{lnt}\}$, then we have \#C $\leqslant \# D$. Moreover, the refined class type $C[1] \wedge\{y:$ Nat $\}$ reduces to the equivalent $\# C \wedge\{x: 0 \vee 1\} \wedge\{x$ : $1 \vee 2, y: \ln t\} \wedge\{y:$ Nat $\}$, which reduces further to $\# C \wedge\{x: 1, y:$ Nat $\}$.

Decomposing class types into more elementary types makes MLstruct's approach fundamentally structural, while retaining the right amount of nominality to precisely reflect the semantics of runtime class-instance matching (i.e., pattern matching based on the runtime class of objet values). It also means that there is no primitive notion of nominal type constructor variance in MLstruct: the covariance and contravariance of type parameters simply arise from the way class and alias types desugar into basic structural components.

\subsection*{2.3 Limitations}

While MLstruct features very flexible and powerful type inference, this naturally comes with some limitations, necessary to ensure the decidability and tractability of the type system. We already mentioned in Section 2.2.2 that intersections cannot be used to type overloading. Here we explain several other significant limitations.
2.3.1 Regular Structural Types. We restrict the shapes of MLstruct data types to be regular trees to make the problem of deciding whether one subsumes another decidable: concretely, occurrences of a class or alias type transitively reachable through the body of that type must have the same shape as the type's head declaration. For instance, the following are disallowed:
```
class C[A]: {x: C[Int]} class C[A]: C[{x: List[A]}] class C[A]: {x: C[C[A]]}
```


We conjecture that allowing such definitions would give our types the expressive power of contextfree grammars, for which language inclusion is undecidable, making subtyping undecidable. ${ }^{13}$ To replace illegal non-regular class fields, one can use either top-level functions or methods. The latter solve this problem by having their types known in advance and not participating in structural subtype checking. Methods are implemented in MLstruct but not presented in this paper.
2.3.2 Simplified Treatment of Unions. MLstruct keeps the expressiveness of unions in check by identifying $\left\{x: \tau_{1}\right\} \vee\left\{y: \tau_{2}\right\}(x \neq y)$ and $\left\{x: \tau_{1}\right\} \vee\left(\tau_{2} \rightarrow \tau_{3}\right)$ with T , as described in Section 2.2.2. To make unions of different fields useful, one needs to "tag" the different cases with class types, as in $C_{1} \wedge\left\{x: \tau_{1}\right\} \vee C_{2} \wedge\left\{y: \tau_{2}\right\}$, allowing us to separately handle these cases through instance matching 'case $v$ of $C_{1} \rightarrow \ldots v . x \ldots, C_{2} \rightarrow \ldots v . y \ldots$, whereas this is not necessary in, e.g., TypeScript.

A direct consequence of this restriction is that in MLstruct, there is no difference between $\{x: \operatorname{Int}, y: \operatorname{Int}\} \vee\{x: \operatorname{Str}, y: \operatorname{Str}\}$ and $\{x: \operatorname{Int} \vee \operatorname{Str}, y: \operatorname{Int} \vee \operatorname{Str}\}$ (still assuming $x \neq y$ ). Indeed, remember that $\left\{x: \tau_{1}, y: \tau_{2}\right\}$ is syntax sugar for $\left\{x: \tau_{1}\right\} \wedge\left\{y: \tau_{2}\right\}$ and by distributivity of unions over intersections, we can take $\{x: \operatorname{Int}, y: \operatorname{Int}\} \vee\{x: \operatorname{Str}, y: \operatorname{Str}\}$ to
$(\{x: \operatorname{Int}\} \vee\{x: \operatorname{Str}\}) \wedge(\{x: \operatorname{Int}\} \vee\{y: \operatorname{Str}\}) \wedge(\{y: \operatorname{Int}\} \vee\{x: \operatorname{Str}\}) \wedge(\{y: \operatorname{Int}\} \vee\{y: \operatorname{Str}\})$ and since $\left\{x: \tau_{1}\right\} \vee\left\{y: \tau_{2}\right\}$ is identified with T , as explained in Section 2.2.2, this reduces to
$$
(\{x: \operatorname{Int}\} \vee\{x: \operatorname{Str}\}) \wedge(\{y: \operatorname{Int}\} \vee\{y: \operatorname{Str}\})
$$
which reduces by field merging to $\{x: \operatorname{Int} \vee \operatorname{Str}\} \wedge\{y: \operatorname{Int} \vee \operatorname{Str}\}$, i.e., $\{x: \operatorname{Int} \vee \operatorname{Str}, y: \operatorname{Int} \vee \operatorname{Str}\}$.
Another consequence is that, e.g., List[Int] $\vee$ List[Str] is identified with List[Int $\vee$ Str]. Again, to distinguish between these two, one should prefer the use of class-tagged unions or, equivalently, proper sum types such as Either[List[Int], List[Str]], defined in terms of Left and Right classes.
2.3.3 Fewer Relationships. Unlike in semantic subtyping approaches, but like in most practical programming languages, we do not have $\{x: \perp\} \leqslant \perp$. This would in fact lead to unsoundness in MLstruct: consider $\pi=\left(\left\{x:\right.\right.$ Some[Int], $\left.y: \tau_{1}\right\} \vee\left\{x:\right.$ None, $\left.\left.y: \tau_{2}\right\}\right) \wedge\{x:$ None $\}$; we would have $\pi \equiv\left\{x: \perp, y: \tau_{1}\right\} \vee\left\{x:\right.$ None, $\left.y: \tau_{2}\right\} \equiv\left\{x:\right.$ None, $\left.y: \tau_{2}\right\}$ by distributivity and also $\pi \equiv\left\{x: \perp \vee\right.$ None, $\left.y: \tau_{1} \vee \tau_{2}\right\}$ by using (2.3.2) before distributing, but $\tau_{1} \not \equiv \tau_{1} \vee \tau_{2}$ in general.
2.3.4 No intersection overloading. Unlike languages like TypeScript, we do not permit the use of intersection types to encode inclusive function overloading [Pierce 1991]. Thankfully, simpler forms of overloading compatible with MLstruct exist; we briefly discuss one in Section 6.

