\section*{6 RELATED WORK}

We now relate the different aspects of MLstruct and $\lambda\urcorner$ with previous work.
Intersection type systems. Intersection types for lambda calculus were pioneered by Coppo and Dezani-Ciancaglini [1980]; Barendregt et al. [1983], after whom the "BCD" type system is named. BCD has the very powerful " $\mathrm{T}-\wedge-\mathrm{I}$ " rule, stating: if $\Gamma \vdash t: \tau_{1}$ and $\Gamma \vdash t: \tau_{2}$, then $\Gamma \vdash t: \tau_{1} \wedge \tau_{2}$. Such systems have the interesting property that typeability coincides with strong normalization [Ghilezan 1996], making type inference undecidable. Thankfully, we do not need something as powerful as $\mathrm{T}-\wedge-\mathrm{I}-$ instead, we introduce intersections in less general ways (i.e., through T-Obj), and we retain decidability of type inference. Most intersection type systems, including MLstruct and $\lambda\urcorner$, do admit the following standard BCD subtyping rules given by Barendregt et al.: (1) $\tau_{1} \wedge \tau_{2} \leqslant \tau_{1}$; (2) $\tau_{1} \wedge \tau_{2} \leqslant \tau_{2}$; and (3) if $\tau_{1} \leqslant \tau_{2}$ and $\tau_{1} \leqslant \tau_{3}$, then $\tau_{1} \leqslant \tau_{2} \wedge \tau_{3}$. Some systems use intersection types to encode a form of overloading [Pierce 1991]. However, Smith [1991] showed that ML-style type inference with such a general form of overloading and subtyping is undecidable (more specifically, finding whether inferred sets of constraints are satisfiable is) and proposed constructor overloading, a restricted form of overloading with more tractable properties, sufficient to encode many common functions, such as addition on different primitive types as well as vectors of those types. Constructor overloading is eminently compatible with MLstruct and MLscript. Another design decision for intersection systems is whether and how this connective should distribute over function types. BCD subtyping states ${ }^{26}\left(\tau \rightarrow \pi_{1}\right) \wedge\left(\tau \rightarrow \pi_{2}\right) \leqslant \tau \rightarrow\left(\pi_{1} \wedge \pi_{2}\right)$ and Barbanera et al. [1995] also propose $\left(\tau_{1} \rightarrow \pi\right) \wedge\left(\tau_{2} \rightarrow \pi\right) \leqslant\left(\tau_{1} \vee \tau_{2}\right) \rightarrow \pi$. Together, these correspond to the minimal relevant logic B+ [Dezani-Ciancaglini et al. 1998]. Approaches like that of Pottier [1998b] use a greatest lower bound connective $\sqcap$ that resembles type intersection $\wedge$ but admits a more liberal rule that generalizes the previous two: $\left(\tau_{1} \rightarrow \pi_{1}\right) \wedge\left(\tau_{2} \rightarrow \pi_{2}\right) \leqslant\left(\tau_{1} \vee \tau_{2}\right) \rightarrow\left(\pi_{1} \wedge \pi_{2}\right)$, which we will refer to as (full) function distributivity. However, notice that in a system with primitives, full function distributivity is incompatible with $\mathrm{T}-\wedge-\mathrm{I}$ and thus precludes intersection-based overloading. ${ }^{27}$

Union and intersection types in programming. Union types are almost as old as intersection types, first introduced by MacQueen et al. [1986], ${ }^{28}$ and both have a vast (and largely overlapping) research literature, with popular applications such as refinement types [Freeman and Pfenning 1991]. These types have seen a recent resurgence, gaining a lot of traction both in academia [Alpuim et al. 2017; Binder et al. 2022; Castagna et al. 2022; Dunfield 2012; Huang and Oliveira 2021; Muehlboeck and Tate 2018; Rehman et al. 2022] and in industry, ${ }^{29}$ with several industry-grade programming languages like TypeScript, Flow, and Scala 3 supporting them, in addition to a myriad of lesser-known research languages. It is worth noting that many modern type systems with intersection types do not support $\mathrm{T}-\wedge-\mathrm{I}$ in its full generality. For example, in TypeScript, a term can only assume an overloaded intersection type if that term is a function with a list of pre-declared type signatures, and in Scala intersections can only be introduced through inheritance. Unions and intersections have also found uses in program analysis. Palsberg and Pavlopoulou [1998] showed that polyvariant analysis can be related formally to a subtyping system with union, intersection, and recursive types. Unions model sets of abstract values and intersections model each usage of an

\footnotetext{
${ }^{26}$ This rule together with T- $\wedge-\mathrm{I}$ was shown unsound in the presence of imperative features by Davies and Pfenning [2000].
${ }^{27}$ For instance, term $i d=\lambda x . x$ has both types Int → Int and Bool → Bool so by T- $\wedge-$ I it would also have type $(\operatorname{lnt} \rightarrow \operatorname{lnt}) \wedge($ Bool $\rightarrow$ Bool $)$. But by function distributivity and subsumption, this would allow typing id as ( $\operatorname{lnt} \vee$ Bool) $\rightarrow$ ( $\operatorname{Int} \wedge$ Bool) and thus typing id 0 (which reduces to 0 ) as Int $\wedge$ Bool, breaking type preservation.
${ }^{28}$ Funnily, MacQueen et al. reported at the time that "type-checking difficulties seem to make intersection and union awkward in practice; moreover it is not clear if there are any potential benefits from their use,"
${ }^{29}$ The first author of this paper has received emails from various people reimplementing Simple-sub [Parreaux 2020] and wanting to know how to add support for first-class union and intersection types, showing the enduring interest in these.
}
abstract value. Their system conspicuously does not feature polymorphism, but it is well-known that there is a correspondence between intersection types and polymorphism - a polymorphic type can be viewed as an infinite intersection of all its possible instantiations [Aiken and Wimmers 1993]. Smith and Wang [2000] propose inferring polymorphic types, rather than intersections, for function definitions, which is more flexible and composable as it can process unrelated definitions separately, whereas the approach based solely on intersections is a global process. We believe that having both intersections and polymorphism, as in MLscript, represents the best of both worlds.

Type inference for unions and intersections. None of the previous approaches we know have proposed a satisfactory ML-style type inference algorithm for full union and intersection types. By satisfactory, we mean that the algorithm should infer principal polymorphic types without backtracking. Earlier approaches used heavily-restricted forms of unions and intersections. For instance, Aiken and Wimmers [1993]; Aiken et al. [1994] impose very strict restrictions on negative unions (they must be disjoint) and on positive intersections (they must not have free variables and must be "upward closed"). Trifonov and Smith [1996] go further and restrict intersections to negative or input positions (those appearing on the right of $\leqslant$ constraints) and unions types to positive or output positions (those appearing on the left). Binder et al. [2022]; Dolan [2017]; Parreaux [2020]; Pottier [1998b] all follow the same idea. In these systems, unions and intersections are not first-class citizens: they cannot be used freely in type annotations. Frisch et al. [2008] infer set-theoretic types (see semantic subtyping below) for a higher-order language with overloading but do not infer polymorphic types. Castagna et al. [2016] propose a complete polymorphic set-theoretic type inference system, but their types are not principal so their algorithm returns several solutions, which leads to the need for backtracking. It seems this should have severe scalability issues, as the number of possible types for an expression would commonly grow exponentially. ${ }^{30}$ Petrucciani [2019] describes ways to reduce backtracking, but recognizes it as fundamentally "unavoidable."

Negation or complement types. Negation types have not been nearly as ubiquitous as unions and intersection in mainstream programming language practice and theory, except in the field of semantic subtyping (see below). Nevertheless, our use of negation types to make progress while solving constraints is not new - Aiken and Wimmers [1993] were the first to propose using complement types in such a way. However, their complement types are less precise than our negation types, ${ }^{31}$ and in their system $\alpha \wedge \tau_{1} \leqslant \tau_{2}$ and $\alpha \leqslant \tau_{2} \vee \neg \tau_{1}$ are not always equivalent.

Recursive types. Recursive types in the style of MLstruct, where a recursive type is equivalent to its unfolding (a.k.a. equi-recursive types, not to be confused with iso-recursive types), have a long history in programming languages research [Abadi and Fiore 1996; Amadio and Cardelli 1993; Appel et al. 2007; Hosoya et al. 2005; MacQueen et al. 1986; Pierce 2002], dating as far back as Morris’ thesis, where he conjectured their use under the name of cyclic types [Morris 1969, pp.122-124]. Recursive types with subtyping were developed in the foundational work of Amadio and Cardelli [1993] and Brandt and Henglein [1998] gave a coinductive axiomatization of such recursive types. Jim and Palsberg [1999] described a co-inductive formalization of recursive types as arbitrary infinite trees which is more general than approaches like ours, which only allows reasoning about regular types. Nevertheless, the algorithms they gave were unsurprisingly restricted to regular types. Gapeyev et al. [2002]; Pierce [2002] reconciled the representation as infinite regular trees with the representation as $\mu$ types, and described the standard algorithms to decide the corresponding subtyping relationship. An important aspect of practical recursive type algorithms is that one

\footnotetext{
${ }^{30}$ Hindley-Milner type inference and derived systems like MLsub and MLstruct can also infer types that grow exponentially in some situations, but these mostly occur in pathological cases, and not in common human-written programs.
${ }^{31}$ For example, in their system $\neg(\tau \rightarrow \pi)$ is the type of all values that are not functions, regardless of $\tau$ and $\pi$.
}
needs to maintain the cache of discovered subtyping relationships across recursive calls to avoid exponential blowup [Gapeyev et al. 2002]. Our implementation of MLstruct follows the same principle, as a naive implementation of $\lambda\urcorner$ would lead to exactly the same blowup. Also refer to Section 4.4.2 for more parallels between the handling of recursive types in $\lambda\urcorner$ and previous work.

Early approaches to subtype inference. The problem of type inference in the presence of subtyping was kick-started in the 1980s [Fuh and Mishra 1989; Mitchell 1984; Stansifer 1988] and studied extensively in the 1990s [Aiken and Wimmers 1993; Curtis 1990; Fuh and Mishra 1990; Jim and Palsberg 1999; Kozen et al. 1994; Palsberg et al. 1997; Pottier 1998a,b; Smith 1991], mostly through the lens of constraint solving on top of Hindley-Milner-style type inference [Damas and Milner 1982; Hindley 1969; Milner 1978]. These approaches often involved combinations of record, intersection, union, and recursive types, but as far as we know none proposed an effective (i.e., without backtracking) principal type inference technique for a system with all of these combined. Odersky et al. [1999] gave them a unified account by proposing a general framework called $\mathrm{HM}(\mathrm{X})$, where the ' X ' stands for a constraint solver to plug into their generic system. While these approaches often claimed a form of principal type inference (also called minimality ${ }^{32}$ ), the constrained types they inferred were often large and unwieldy. Beyond inferring constraint sets and ensuring their satisfiability, the related problem of simplification to produce more readable and efficiently-processable types was also studied, often by leveraging the connection between regular type trees and finite-state automata [Aiken 1996; Eifrig et al. 1995; Pottier 1996, 1998b, 2001; Simonet 2003]. A major stumbling block with all of these approaches was the problem of non-structural subtyping entailment ${ }^{33}$ (NSSE), which is to decide whether a given type scheme, which consists in a polymorphic type along with its constraints on type variables, subsumes another. Solving this issue is of central importance because it is needed to check implementations against user-provided interfaces and type signatures, and because it provides a foundation from which to derive sound type simplification techniques. However, to this day NSSE remains an open problem, and it is not known whether it is even decidable [Dolan 2017]. Due to these difficulties, interest in this very powerful form of subtyping all but faded in the subsequent decade, in what we interpret as a minor "subtype inference winter." Indeed, many subsequent approaches were developed in reaction to this complexity with the aim of being simpler to reason about (e.g., polymorphic variants - see below).

Algebraic subtyping. Approaches like that of Pottier [1998b] used a lattice-theoretic construction of types inspired by the connection between types and term automata. Meet $\sqcap$ and join □ operators resembling intersection and union types are used to compactly representing conjunctions of constraints, but these are not first-class types, in that they are restricted to appearing respectively in negative and positive positions only. Full function distributivity (defined above, in intersection type systems) holds in these approaches due to the lattice structure. Pottier's system still suffered from a lack of complete entailment algorithm due to NSSE. Dolan [2017]; Dolan and Mycroft [2017] later built upon that foundation and proposed an algebraic construction of types which allowed breaking free of NSSE and finally enjoying a sound and complete entailment algorithm. Two magical ingredients allowed this to be possible: 1. the definition of "extensible" type semantics based on constructing types as a distributive lattice of coproducts; and 2. a different treatment of type variables than in previous work, representing them as part of the lattice of types and not as unknowns ranging over a set of ground types. In this paper, we in turn build on these foundations, although we only retain the latter innovation, somehow forgoing the "extensible"

\footnotetext{
${ }^{32}$ Some authors like Aiken et al. [1994] make a distinction between a concept of principality which is purely syntactic (relating types by a substitution instance relationship) and minimality which involve a semantic interpretation of types.
33 "Non-structural" here is by opposition to so-called structural subtyping, which is a more tractable but heavily restricted form of subtyping that only relates type constructors of identical arities [Palsberg et al. 1997] (precluding, e.g., $\{x: \tau\} \leqslant \mathrm{T}$ ).
}
construction of types. ${ }^{34}$ Together with our generalization of the subtyping lattice to a Boolean one by adding negations and with the additional structure we impose on types (such as reducing unions of unrelated records to $T$ ), this turns out to be sufficient for allowing principal type inference and decidable entailment (though we only sketched the latter in this paper for lack of space). Ingredient 1 allowed Dolan to show the soundness of his system in a very straightforward way, relying on the property (called Proposition 12 by Dolan [2017]) that any constraint of the form $\bigwedge_{i} \tau_{i} \leqslant \bigvee_{i} \pi_{i}$ holds iff there is a $k$ such that $\tau_{k} \leqslant \pi_{k}$ when all $\tau_{i}$ have distinct constructors and all $\pi_{i}$ similarly. By contrast, we allow some intersections of unrelated type constructors to reduce to ⟂ and some unions of them to T , and we are thus not "extensible" in Dolan's terminology. This is actually desirable in the context of pattern matching, where we want to eliminate impossible cases by making the intersections of unrelated class types empty. It is also needed in order to remove the ambiguity from constraints like $\left(\tau_{1} \rightarrow \tau_{2}\right) \wedge\{x: \pi\} \leqslant\left(\tau_{1}^{\prime} \rightarrow \tau_{2}^{\prime}\right) \vee\left\{x: \pi^{\prime}\right\}$ which in our system reduces to $\left(\tau_{1} \rightarrow \tau_{2}\right) \wedge\{x: \pi\} \leqslant \mathrm{T}$. The present paper also takes heavy inspiration from our earlier operationally-focused take on Dolan's type inference algorithm [Parreaux 2020]. While Dolan shirks from explicitly representing constraints, which he prefers to inline inside types on the fly as $\sqcap$ and $\sqcup$ types, we use an approach closer to the original constrained-types formulation followed by Pottier. Besides being much easier to implement, our approach has other concrete advantages, such as the ability to deal with invariance seamlessly (class $C[A]:\{f: A \rightarrow A\}$, which is invariant in A, is valid in MLstruct) and a simpler treatment of cyclic type variable constraints.

Semantic subtyping and set-theoretic types. The semantic subtyping approaches [Castagna et al. 2022, 2016; Frisch et al. 2002, 2008; Petrucciani 2019] view types as sets of values which inhabit them and define the subtyping relationship as set inclusion, giving set-based meaning to union, intersection, and negation (or complement) connectives. This is by contrast to algebraic subtyping, which may admit subtyping rules that violate the set-theoretic interpretation, such as function distributivity, to ensure that the subtyping lattice has desirable algebraic properties. For more detailed discussions contrasting semantic subtyping with other approaches, we refer the reader to Parreaux [2020] and Muehlboeck and Tate [2018].

Occurrence and flow typing. Occurrence typing was originally introduced by Tobin-Hochstadt and Felleisen [2008] for Typed Scheme, and was later incorporated into TypeScript and Flow, where it is known as flow typing. It allows the types of variables to be locally refined based on path conditions encountered in the program. Negation types are pervasive in this context, though they are often only used at the meta-theoretic level. Instance-matching in MLstruct can be understood as a primitive form of occurrence typing in that it refines the types of scrutinee variables in case expressions, similarly to the approach of Rehman et al. [2022]. Occurrence typing was also recently extended to the semantic subtyping context [Castagna et al. 2021, 2022], where negation types are first-class types. The latter work proposes a powerful type inference approach that can infer overloaded function signatures as intersections types; however, this approach does not support polymorphism and likely does not admit principal types. The idea of simplifying the definition of core object-oriented type languages by using class tags (or brands) in addition to structural typing is not new and was notably developed by Jones et al. [2015]; Lee et al. [2015].

Polymorphic records/variants and row polymorphism. Polymorphic records are structurallytyped products whose types admit the usual width and depth subtyping relationships. Their dual, polymorphic variants, are another useful language feature [Garrigue 1998, 2001], used to encode structural sum types. In their simplest expression, polymorphic records (resp. variants) do not support ad-hoc field extension (resp. default match cases). Previous approaches have thus extended

\footnotetext{
${ }^{34}$ As discussed in prior work [Parreaux 2020], we believe the argument for Dolan's notion of extensibility to be rather weak.
}
polymorphic records and variants with row polymorphism, which uses a new kind of variables, named "row" variables, to record the presence and absence of fields (resp. cases) in a given type. Some approaches, like OCaml's polymorphic variants and object types, use row polymorphism exclusively to simulate subtype polymorphism, in order to avoid subtyping in the wider languages. However, row polymorphism and subtyping actually complement each other well, and neither is as flexible without the other [Pottier 1998b, Chapter 14.7]. There are also techniques for supporting variant and record extensibility through union, intersection, and negation types, as shown by Castagna et al. [2016], who also explain that their system resolves long-standing limitations with OCaml-style row polymorphism. In our system, we solve many (though not all) of these limitations, but we also support principal type inference. It is worth pointing out that OCaml's polymorphic variants [Garrigue 2001] and related systems based on kinds [Ohori 1995] lack support for polymorphic extension [Gaster and Jones 1996; White 2015], whereas MLstruct does (see mapSome in the introduction). As a simpler example, def foo x dflt els = case x of \{ Apple → dflt | _ → els $x$ \} would be assigned a too restrictive type in OCaml and as a consequence foo (Banana \{\}) 0 (fun $z \rightarrow$ case $z$ of $\{$ Banana $\rightarrow 1\}$ ) would not type check (OCaml would complains that the function argument does not handle Apple). A more expressive row-polymorphic system exposing row variables to users would support this use case [Gaster and Jones 1996; Rémy 1994], but as explained in the introduction, even these have limitations compared to our subtyped unions.

